.. _introduction:

**********************************
Introduction
**********************************

**SADIT** is the acronym of **S**\ ystematic **A**\ nomaly **D**\ etection of
**I**\ nternet **T**\ raffic.  The motivation of SADIT is to make the
comparison and the validation of internet anomaly deteciton algorithmes super
easy. It addresses this problem from the following two perspectives:

    1. Faciliate the data generation
    2. Provide a standard library of anomaly detection algorithms.

If you are a researcher interested in Internet Anomaly Detection, we strongly
encourage you to implement your algorithms following the APIs and data format
of SADIT so that you can easily compare your methods with exisiting algorithms
in SADIT. Your help will be highly appreciated if you can contribute your own
algorithm to the algorithm libray of SADIT. Feel free to contact me if you have
any question.

What's New in 1.1
==================================
    - **More Flexible Configuration Script**: You can write the parameters in a
      seperate config script and specify it with -c option.
    - **Generation of Traffic For Dynamic Network**:  The distribution of flow
      traffic and the arrival rate can change with time.
    - **Robust Anomaly Detection Method**:  A new anomaly detection that can
      work robustly in dynamic network environment has been added.
    - **Faster Data Access Speed**. Use numpy.array to store data instead of list of list, which accelerate the problem by a large extend.
    - **Better structure between classes**: 

What's New in 1.0
==================================
the version 1.0 is a result of big refactor of version 0.0. The refactor makes the code more
scalable and less buggy.
    - **Paradigm of Object-oriented programming**: The **Configure** module and **Detector** module have been rewritten under
      object-oriented paradigm. In version 0.0, all modules depends on the global
      settings file setting.py, which make the code more vulunerable to bugs. In this verison only 
      few scripts depend on settings.py. Classes are widely used to reduce the need to
      pass parameters around. In case that parameters passing is required, well-defined structures are used.
    - **Experiment**: A new folder ROOT/Experiment appears to contain different
      experiments. You can write your own scripts of Experiment and put them in
      this folder.
    - **Better Sensitivity Anaysis**: In the version 0.0, sensitivity anaysis is 
      done by change the global settings.py file and rerun the simulation. Since 
      settings.py is a typical python module,changing it during the run is really not 
      a good idea. In this version, special Experiment is designed to support
      sensitivity analysis.


Structure
================================
**SADIT** consists of  two parts. The first part is a collection of anomalies
detection algorithms. The second part is labeled flow record generator. The
follow sections will describe the two parts accordingly.

.. It also implement one algorithm proposed by `Jing Conan Wang <http://people.bu.edu/wangjing/>`_, Ronald Lockle Taylor and `Yannis Paschalidis <http://ionia.bu.edu/>`_ .Look at our `poster <http://people.bu.edu/wangjing/pdf/data_exfiltration-back.pdf>`_ for more information of our work

.. **configure**
    configure the simulator based on the description of anomaly in settings.py.
    In current version, it is **DOT file** needed by *fs*-simulator.
.. **simulator**
    Generate the traffic through simulation. In current version, it is a revised
    version of `fs-simulator <http://cs.colgate.edu/~jsommers/#code>`_. It will read
    the **DOT file** generated by **configure** and generate a network flow
    file with Cisco Netflow version 5 binary format.
.. **detector**
..
    this module will read the network flow file generate by **simulator** and
    try to detect anomaly accordingly. In current version, the detector is based
    on one of our `paper <http://people.bu.edu/wangjing/html/AnomalyDetection.html>`_. Look at our `poster <http://people.bu.edu/wangjing/pdf/data_exfiltration-back.pdf>`_ for more information of our work.

Collection of Anomaly Detection Algorithm
------------------------------------
All the detection algorithms locates in the *ROOT/Detector* folder:

    - **SVMDetector.py** contains two SVM based anomaly detection algorithmes 
      1. SVM Temporal Detector and 2. SVM Flow by Flow Detector.
    - **StoDetector.py** contains two anomaly detection algorithms based on
      Large Deviation Theory.
    - **RobustDetect.py** contains a algorithm that works robustly under dynamic network environment.

Labeled Flow Records Generator 
------------------------------------
Labeled Flow Records Generator consists of a *Configurer* and a *Simulator*.
The *Simulator* part is essentially a revised `fs simulator
<http://cs-people.bu.edu/eriksson/papers/erikssonInfocom11Flow.pdf>`_,
developed by researchers at UW Madison. *Configurer* first generate a flow
specification (DOT format) file with certain types of anomalies, then the
*Simulator* will generate flow records and corresponding labels.

Configurer
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
*Configurer* generate the corresponding DOT file according to description of user
behaviour. The important concepts in *Configurer* are as follows:

    - **Generator**: description of a certain type of flow traffic. For
      examples, *Harpoon* generator represents `harpoon flows
      <http://cs.colgate.edu/~jsommers/harpoon/>`_.  
    - **Behaviour**: description of temporal pattern. There are three types
      behaviour:
          - **Normal** behaviour is described by start time and duration.
          - **I.I.D** behaviour has a list of possible states, but one state
                       will be selected as current state every *t* seconds
                       according to certain probability distribution.
          - **Markov** the state in different time is not independtly and
                       identically distributed,  but is a Markov process

    - **Modulator**: combine *Behaviour* and *Generator*, basicially description
      of generator behaviour. There are three types of modulators, corresponding
      to three behaviours described above.
      
..    Two types of
      modulator are supported: **Normal** and **Markov**. The normal modulator
      is bascially the same with modulator in `fs simulator
      <http://cs-people.bu.edu/eriksson/papers/erikssonInfocom11Flow.pdf>`_,
      which is described by *(start, generator, profile)*.  We also implement a
      markov modulator which has markov behaviour.


    - **Node**: host in the network, has *modulator_list* attributes
    - **Edge**: connecting two network nodes, has *delay*, *capacity* attributes
    - **Network**: a collection of network nodes and edges
    - **Anomaly**: description of the anomaly. When an anomaly is injected into
      the network, some attributes in the network (*Node*, *Edge*) will be
      changed.

..
    **Generator**, **Modulator** and **Behaviour** can completely decribe the
    traffic of users. **Generator** describe the type of traffic. **Modulator**
    describe the duration. And **Behaviour** describes the action of users take each
    time.

..  **Generator** and **Modulator** are concepts in `fs simulator.
..  <http://cs-people.bu.edu/eriksson/papers/erikssonInfocom11Flow.pdf>`_. 
..  every *t* second it will the use will choose from two *states*.

Simulator
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
Simulator is basically a revised version of fs simulator. We have added
support to export anoumalous flows(add label information).




Usage
=====================================
To run SADIT, just go to the diretory of SADIT source code, change ROOT variable in
**settings.py** to the absolute path of the source directory. Then type ::

To run SADIT, just go to the diretory of SADIT source code, change ROOT variable in
**settings.py** to the absolute path of the source directory. Then type ::
    $ ./sadit -h


usage: sadit [--profile PROFILE] [-h] [experiment]

sadit

positional arguments:
  experiment         print ./sadit <exper> -h for help of a experiment
                     Avaliable experiments are [MultiSrvExperiment | Detect |
                     DetectBatch | Eval | Sim | BaseExper | DetectCompare |
                     SimDetect | Batch | GUITopoSim]

optional arguments:
  --profile PROFILE  profile the program
  -h, --help         print help message and exit

*experiment* specify the experiment you want to execute. An **experiment**
is actually a subcommand that has certain functionality.

Avaliable experiments are as follows:
    - **Detect**: detect the flow record data specified by *-d* option
    - **Sim**: simulate and generate flow records.
    - **GUITopoSim** : simulate using network topogogy created by GUI
      topology editor
    - **SimDetect**: simulate and detect.
    - **Eval**: Evaluation of the detection algorithmm (calculate fpr, fnr
      and plot the ROC curve)
    - **DetectBatch**: runs detection algortihms with all combinations of
      parameters and outputs the results to a folder, helps to select the
      optimal parameters.
    - **DetectCompare**: run several detection algorithms and save the
      intermediate results. Can also load results load computed before and
      show comparison figure.


To see the help message of an  experiment, just type ::
    $ ./sadit -e <exper> -h

Whenever you are not sure about the options you can set, just add *-h* to
the end of command and execute it and help message will be printed
correspondingly.



Sample Configuration for Labeled Flow Generator
-------------------------------------
    - SimExample.py
    - TimeVaringSimExample.py
    - DTMarkovConfig.py
    - CTMarkovConfig.py
    - imalse/

Sample Configuration for Detectors
-------------------------------------
    - DetectConfig.py
    - DetectSQLConfig.py
    - RobustDetect.py
    - EvalConfig.py
    - DetectBatchConfig.py


Want to implement your algorithm?
=====================================

Use the labeled flow records generator in fs simulator
-------------------------------------
The generated flows will be the *ROOT/Simulator* folder. The flows end with
*_flow.txt*, for example, n0_flow.txt is the network flows trough node 0.
File start with *abnormal_* is the exported abnormal flows correspondingly.

**A typical line is**
    textexport n0 1348412129.925416 1348412129.925416 1348412130.070733 10.0.7.4:80->10.0.8.5:53701 tcp 0x0 n1 5 4215 FSA

**line format**
    prefix nodename time flow_start_time flow_end_time src_ip:src_port->dst_ip:dst_port protocol payload destname unknown flowsize unknown

After finishing your detection algorihms, the last thing you need to do is to
add the corresponding class name to **detector_map** in *ROOT/Detector/API.py*.
After that you will be able to use your detection algorithm. You can use
**Compare** experiment to compare with other algorithm or **Eval** algorithm to
Evaluate your algorithm. You can also implement new experiment to play with
your new algorithm.


Use Other flow records
-------------------------------------
SADIT does not only support the text output format of fs simulator, but also
several other types of flow data. The data wrapper classes are defined in
:mod:`sadit.Detector.Data` module and the handler classes locate in the :mod:`sadit.Detector.DataHandler` module.


If you want use a new type of data, you need to implement a data wrapper class first.
:mod:`sadit.Detector.Data.Data` is the base class for all data wrapper class.
:mod:`sadit.Detector.Data.PreloadHardDiskFile` is the base class for all file-type
data wrapper data.  :mod:`sadit.Detector.Data.MySQLDatabase` is the base class
for all mysql database wrapper class.


Optionally, you can implement a handler class that will manipulate the
DataFile and and some useful quantities that may be useful to you algorithms.
The data handler classes are defined in :mod:`sadit.Detector.DataHandler` module.
:class:`sadit.Detector.DataHandler.QuantizeDataHandler` and its subclasses define
`get_em()` function to get probability distribution of the flows, which is
useful for the stochastic approaches. 
If you just need the raw data, you can simple use :class:`sadit.Detector.DataHandler.FakeDataHandler`

Then you just need to add your data_handler to **data_handler_handle_map**
defined in *ROOT/Detector/API.py*

Download 
=====================================
You can download sadit from `here <https://bitbucket.org/hbhzwj/sadit/get/2182e36f40d5.zip>`_.

or you can user mercurial to get a complete copy with revision history ::

    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/hbhzwj/sadit


Installation
=====================================

SADIT can be installed in Linux, Mac OS X and Windows(through cygwin) with python 2.7

Debain (Ubuntu, Mint, etc)
-------------------------------------
If you are using debain based system like Ubuntu, Mint, you are lucky. There
is an installation script prepared for debain based system, just type ::
    
    sh debain.sh

Mac OS X
-------------------------------------
For mac user, just type  ::
    
    sudo python setup-dep.py

the **ipaddr**, **networkx**, **pydot**, **pyparsing** and **py-radix** will
be automatically downloaded and installed.  If you just want to use the
**Detector** part, that is already enough If you want to use **Configure** and
**Simulator** part, then you also need to install numpy and matplotlib. Please
go to http://www.scipy.org/NumPy and
http://matplotlib.sourceforge.net/faq/installing_faq.html for installation
instruction.

Windows
-------------------------------------
SADIT can be installed on windows machine with the help of cgywin. There is a
detailed step by step installation tutorial, click
https://docs.google.com/open?id=0B0EiFkYoJWwbaloybWV5V1BuQVk

Manually
-------------------------------------
If the automatical methods fail, you can try to install manually.  **SADIT**
has been tested on python2.7.2.  SADIT depends on all softwares that
fs-simulate depends on:

    - ipaddr (2.1.1)  `Get <http://ipaddr-py.googlecode.com/files/ipaddr-2.1.1.tar.gz>`_
    - networkx (1.0) `Get <http://networkx.lanl.gov/download/networkx/networkx-1.0.1.tar.gz>`_
    - pydot (1.0.2) `Get <http://pydot.googlecode.com/files/pydot-1.0.2.tar.gz>`_
    - pyparsing (1.5.2) `Get <http://downloads.sourceforge.net/project/pyparsing/pyparsing/pyparsing-1.5.2/pyparsing-1.5.2.tar.gz?r=http%3A%2F%2Fsourceforge.net%2Fprojects%2Fpyparsing%2Ffiles%2Fpyparsing%2Fpyparsing-1.5.2%2F&ts=1332828745&use_mirror=softlayer>`_
    - py-radix (0.5) `Get <http://py-radix.googlecode.com/files/py-radix-0.5.tar.gz>`_

besides: it requires:
    - numpy `Get <http://numpy.scipy.org/>`_
    - matplotlib `Get <http://matplotlib.sourceforge.net/>`_
    - profilehooks `Get <http://mg.pov.lt/profilehooks/>`_

if you are in debain based system. you can simple use ::

    sudo apt-get install python-dev
    sudo apt-get install python-numpy
    sudo apt-get install python-matplotlib

in other system, refer to corresponding website for installation
of **numpy** and **matplotlib**


Videos
=====================================
I have recorded several hand by hand video tutorials for SADIT 1.0. The usage
of SADIT 1.1 is **a little bit different**, but I think these videos will still be
useful. I will record new videos for latest version of SADIT when I have time.

Installation
-------------------------------------
..  http://youtu.be/MS8jfJSPBn4
.. raw:: html

        <iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/MS8jfJSPBn4" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Configuration After Installation
-------------------------------------
..  http://youtu.be/i87sXncx5KA
.. raw:: html

    <iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/i87sXncx5KA" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Get Help Message
-------------------------------------
..  http://youtu.be/w-9kHeMcIZw
.. raw:: html

    <iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/w-9kHeMcIZw" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Basic run and tune of parameters
---------------------------------------
..  http://youtu.be/w-9kHeMcIZ
..  http://youtu.be/rAIJwZpIOjY

.. raw:: html

    <iframe width="420" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/rAIJwZpIOjY" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Search for Good Parameters
---------------------------------------
..  http://youtu.be/0_9nAfdWt50
.. raw:: html

    <iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/0_9nAfdWt50" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Generate Comparison Plot
---------------------------------------
..  http://youtu.be/zaQB0M5VpnM

.. raw:: html

    <iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/zaQB0M5VpnM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>


If you have no access to youtube, you can download the videos(all AVI format) in
the following link(*it is hosted in Google Drive Server*).
https://docs.google.com/open?id=0B9xGMLqrhlbdNE9UTFhSX2hUa2s
